                                 GENOME

Genome

This repository contains a reproducible analysis notebook named
"GENOME_PRC (1).ipynb" intended as a starting point for genomic data
exploration, preprocessing, visualization, and lightweight analysis. The
notebook organizes the data handling, transformation, and plotting steps in
a clear, executable sequence that analysts can run and adapt for their own
datasets.

Project intent

- Demonstrate a reproducible Jupyter-based workflow for small-scale genomic
  analyses.
- Provide documented preprocessing steps that prepare raw or sample data
"GENOME_PRC (1).ipynb" intended as a starting point for genomic data
exploration, preprocessing, visualization, and lightweight analysis. The
notebook organizes the data handling, transformation, and plotting steps in
a clear, executable sequence that analysts can run and adapt for their own
datasets.
  for downstream summary statistics and visualization.
- Keep the repository lightweight by excluding large raw datasets; instead,
  reference external storage locations and include only small sample files
  when needed for demonstrations.

Repository contents

- GENOME_PRC (1).ipynb  : The main Jupyter notebook with analysis steps.
- README.md             : Detailed project description and usage notes.
- PROJECT_DESCRIPTION.txt: This plain-text overview (fully formatted).
 
Project intent

- Demonstrate a reproducible Jupyter-based workflow for small-scale genomic
  analyses.
- Provide documented preprocessing steps that prepare raw or sample data
  for downstream summary statistics and visualization.
- Keep the repository lightweight by excluding large raw datasets; instead,
  reference external storage locations and include only small sample files
  when needed for demonstrations.
- .gitignore            : Patterns to exclude temporary and environment
                          files.

Getting started

1. Create and activate a Python virtual environment:

   python -m venv .venv
   .\.venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1   (on PowerShell)

2. Install common dependencies (adjust as needed):

   pip install pandas numpy matplotlib seaborn jupyter

3. Run the notebook from the repository root:

   jupyter notebook "GENOME_PRC (1).ipynb"

Data handling

- Do not commit large raw data to this repository. Use a cloud bucket,
  institutional storage, or a local data volume and update the notebook's
  configuration cell with the correct paths.
- If you add example data, keep it under `data/sample/` with descriptive
  filenames and a short README in that directory describing the format.

ABSTRACT

This document describes a compact, reproducible Jupyter notebook-based
workflow for preprocessing and exploratory analysis of genomic summary data.
The notebook focuses on data hygiene, QC, and visualization that help
prepare datasets for downstream analyses like variant interpretation or
statistical modeling.

PROBLEM STATEMENT

Genomic analysis teams frequently encounter heterogeneous data formats,
missing metadata, and inconsistent quality metrics that slow down analysis
and reduce reproducibility. This repository provides a documented, minimal
pipeline that standardizes common preprocessing tasks and demonstrates best
practices for reproducible notebook-based workflows.

FEATURES

- Configuration-driven notebook for easy adaptation to new datasets.
- Data validation and schema checks to catch format issues early.
- QC summaries and plots to identify low-quality samples or outliers.
- Simple export of cleaned tables and figures for reporting.

DATA SOURCES AND FORMATS

- Expected input types: CSV/TSV; examples show typical column names used in
  variant summary data.
- Large binary formats (BAM/VCF) are referenced externally; the repo does
  not include large files.

EXPECTED OUTPUTS

- Cleaned sample tables (CSV) saved locally by the notebook.
- Visualizations written to a `figures/` folder.
- Notebook cell documenting the exact commands and parameters used.

EXTENDING THE PROJECT

- Extract repeatable processing code into a `src/` Python package.
- Add `requirements.txt` or `environment.yml` to make environments
  reproducible.
- Consider integrating with workflow tools for larger pipelines.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This repository is intended as a personal or small-team starting point. If
you reuse or extend it, add contributors and cite any third-party datasets
or libraries you rely on.



